Post/ergonomic apis (#7)
zheylmun/site: content/posts/designing_ergonomic_apis.md

obvious correctness drives ergonomics.
Because the language is so strict, it's easy to identify where you've cut corners to get things working.
Like just about everyone who's ever written code, I have taken shortcuts I regretted to make deliveries on time.
I didn't always consider carefully whether functions should take references or values.
I didn't always encode the invariants of my data structures in the type system.
I wrote some functions that were awkward to use and traits that resulted in a lot of boilerplate.
I've also been fortunate enough to have the opportunity to go back and address much of that technical debt.
The results have been rather remarkable.

By revising code that was obviously lacking, I have been able to make my code more simple, correct, and robust.
The ergonomics of the APIs I've built have become far better than I envisioned when I began writing them because Rust made it easy to find and fix the hacks.

## What are Ergonomics?

The ergonomics of a programming language are the features that make it easy to write code.
Go, Python, and Ruby are known for their ergonomics.

> They have a simple syntax, powerful standard libraries, and a focus on developer productivity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They have simple syntaxes, powerful standard libraries, and a focus on developer productivity.
```

Unfortunately, their ergonomics come at the cost of making it easy to introduce runtime errors
and structural issues that can be difficult to debug.
It's easy to develop functionality quickly in those languages,
but there tends to be a long tail of bugs and performance issues.
It's easy to get things *mostly right*,
but it's much harder to get things *exactly right*.

On the other hand, Rust has a reputation for being difficult to learn and use,
seemingly at odds with its popularity and veneration.
It has a steep learning curve, a complex type system,
and a focus on memory safety and performance that forces developers to worry about things they might not even consider in other languages.
Frustratingly, you have to consider and address all of those issues before your code will even compile.

> The ergonomics of libraries are a little different.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the context of libraries, "ergonomics" means something a little different.
```

> An ergonomic library is one that is easy to use, easy to understand, and hard to misuse.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An ergonomic library is one that is easy to use, hard to misuse, easy to understand.
```

Rust's strict but expressive type system allows for libraries that are both powerful and easy to use.
Well designed libraries encode their invariants in the types and functions they expose,

> making it difficult to misuse them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
making it difficult to invoke them incorrectly.
```

Struct MyComplexType{...
```

**Boom**, done.

Need to make a complicated  SQL query?
[Diesel](https://diesel.rs") has you covered.

```rust
let results =
      orders::table
      .inner_join(users::table.on(orders::user_id.eq(users::id)))
      .inner_join(order_items::table.on(order_items::order_id.eq(orders::id)))
      .filter(order_items::product_id.eq(product_id))
      .select((users::username,
          diesel::sql_function::sum(order_items::price).as(total_spent)))
      .group_by(users::username)
      .order_by(diesel::sql_function::sum(order_items::price).desc())
      .limit(10)
      .load::<(String, i32)>(conn)?;
```
**Whoa**, that's a big, complex expression that says and does exactly what I want.

There are far too many examples of incredible API design in the Rust ecosystem to include here. I highly recommend checking out the growing list of community recommended crates at [Awesome Rust](https://github.com/rust-unofficial/awesome-rust) and [blessed.rs](https://blessed.rs/crates).
Rust's standard library is the only standard library that I've ever used that I would describe as both
extremely clever and easily readable.
Clever code tends to be dense and opaque,

> but Rust's standard library is ingenious because its abstractions are so simple and powerful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but Rust's standard library is ingenious because its abstractions are so simple yet powerful.
```

## What's Wrong?

The Rust language is very specific.
Very little is implicit.
If you want to copy something, you have to call `.clone()`.
If you get an error, you have to explicitly handle it (or call `.unwrap()` 🤮).
If you've coded yourself into a corner with the borrow checker,
you have to refactor your code to fix your access patterns.

Fortunately, it's pretty easy to make sweeping changes in Rust for the same reasons that writing it in the first place is difficult.
The compiler catches cases where you've made a mistake or missed something that needs to be updated.
The result is that once a major refactor compiles again, the code probably works as intended.
The compiler is very particular, but it has your back, and it's a great feeling.

The specificity of the language does tend to awaken the perfectionist in its developers:
- "I shouldn't need to clone that here, I should be able to pass a reference."
- "I shouldn't need to unwrap that here, I should be able to handle the error."
- "I shouldn't need to write that boilerplate, I should be able to use a macro."
- "I should be able to prevent that mistake from happening in the first place."

> This cycle can result in a lot of revisiting code that works but isn't quite perfect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This cycle can result in revisiting a lot of code that works but isn't quite perfect.
```

Many of the deficiencies described above are so subtle in other languages that even experienced developers might overlook them.
In Rust, they're glaringly obvious.

This is a double edged sword, of course.
- It's easy to get lost in the weeds of perfectionism

> - It's also Rust's superpower

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's easy to get lost in the weeds of perfectionism, but it's also Rust's superpower.

```

Their authors made them work, and then they made them better.
The crates that are incredible works of engineering today have stood the test of time.
The authors have fixed the papercuts reported by thousands of users.
Issues they might never have considered when writing their libraries have been reported and remediated.
These crates have been polished to a mirror sheen and are a joy to use because
so many of the things that were imperfect in previous iterations have been addressed.

Sometimes fixing the issue was easy, and sometimes it was hard.
Sometimes it required a major refactor, and sometimes it required building a whole separate library.
Sometimes it required working with the language team itself to fix bugs or introduce new language features.
The unifying factor is that the authors were dedicated to making their code better,
and the language gave them the tools to do so.
Developers want to make their code better in every language.
Rust is unique in how it helps developers to discover where and how to improve.

The result is that many crates in the Rust ecosystem are a joy to use.
It's not just because the authors are genius programmers (many of them are).

> It's because they've spent the time to address areas that were flawed over and over again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's because they've put in the time to address flaws over and over again.
```

> You don't have to be a world famous open source developer to write great code in Rust.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You don't have to be a famous open source developer to write great code in Rust.
```
